This document describes the preprocessing steps performed before 
manually-guided tractography in the TractEM project 
[https://my.vanderbilt.edu/tractem/]. Code to perform the preprocessing may be 
found on github [https://github.com/MASILab/tractem/preprocessing]. 
Image registrations and transformations were performed using MATLAB 
[https://www.mathworks.com/] and SPM 12 [http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/]. 
Diffusion reconstructions were performed using DSI Studio 
[http://dsi-studio.labsolver.org/].

We began with a diffusion-weighted image set that had already been adjusted for 
head motion, eddy current effects, and distortion. For instance, the obtained 
HCP data sets were preprocessed as described by Glasser [2013].

A T1-weighted anatomical image from the same subject was coregistered to a b=0 
image from the diffusion-weighted image set, if necessary.

A diffusion tensor reconstruction was performed on the diffusion-weighted image 
set to produce a fractional anisotropy image in the subject's native space.

The fractional isotropy image was registered to a probabilistic template image 
using an affine transformation. The template image was generated by applying 
the "pooled" affine transformation of Lancaster 2007 to the ICBM152-space 
fractional anisotropy template image from the FSL atlas distribution 
[https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/Atlases, Mori 2005, Wakana 2007, Hua 
2008].

The affine transformation was applied to the diffusion-weighted images, and the 
appropriate corresponding adjustment was made to the b vectors.

A Generalized Q-sampling Imaging (GQI) reconstruction [Yeh 2010], or a 4th 
order spherical harmonic Q-ball reconstruction (QBI) [Tuch 2004, Descoteaux 
2007], was applied to the transformed Talairach space diffusion-weighted 
images. GQI works best with a fairly dense sampling of directions and shells 
(e.g. Human Connectome Project), whereas QBI is applicable to less densely 
sampled single-shell data.

To provide the subject-specific lobar masks that are used in some of the 
tractography protocols, a multi-atlas segmentation algorithm was applied to the 
subject's native space T1 image [Asman 2013,2014]. This segmentation was 
transformed to Talairach space using the affine transformation determined above.



References:

Asman AJ, Landman BA. Non-local statistical label fusion for multi-atlas 
segmentation. Medical image analysis. 2013;17(2):194-208. 
doi:10.1016/j.media.2012.10.002.

Asman AJ, Landman BA. Hierarchical Performance Estimation in the Statistical 
Label Fusion Framework. Medical image analysis. 2014;18(7):1070-1081. 
doi:10.1016/j.media.2014.06.005.

Descoteaux M, Angelino E, Fitzgibbons S, Deriche R. Regularized, fast, and
robust analytical Q-ball imaging. Magn Reson Med. 2007 Sep;58(3):497-510. 
PubMed PMID: 17763358.

Glasser MF, Sotiropoulos SN, Wilson JA, et al. The Minimal Preprocessing 
Pipelines for the Human Connectome Project. NeuroImage. 2013;80:105-124. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.127.

Lancaster JL, Tordesillas-Guti√©rrez D, Martinez M, Salinas F, Evans A, Zilles 
K, Mazziotta JC, Fox PT. Bias between MNI and Talairach coordinates analyzed
using the ICBM-152 brain template. Hum Brain Mapp. 2007 Nov;28(11):1194-205.
PubMed PMID: 17266101.

Tuch DS. Q-ball imaging. Magn Reson Med. 2004 Dec;52(6):1358-72. PubMed PMID: 
15562495.

Yeh FC, Wedeen VJ, Tseng WY. Generalized q-sampling imaging. IEEE Trans Med
Imaging. 2010 Sep;29(9):1626-35. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2010.2045126. Epub 2010 Mar
18. PubMed PMID: 20304721.
